---
layout: post
title: RFPS (Real FPS)
category: techblog
date: 2017-05-23
---


<br>
If I hand you an awesome device that can impart velocities of nearly a thousand kilometers a second to small objects, wouldn't you think it's cool?<br>
It's for this reason that I love First Person Shooter games.<br>
There's this thrill about strategising and using awesome devices that other game types don't provide.<br>
<br>
<br>

---

## What Is RFPS

**RFPS** is an idea that is propelled by my sheer love for FPS games.<br>
It will be a deathmatch game where any number of people can participate.<br>
The participants will have a vest and a gun, and the play area is covered by a master server through wireless repeaters.<br>
The guns will have an IR transmitter to simulate firing, and will have OLED screens for displaying all the relevant data like ammunition, health, score, etc.<br>

### Implementation

Whenever a player connects to the server, it is randomly alloted a 16-bit hex-code, which is the player's identity.<br>
The gun is wired to the vest, which houses the battery, while the gun has electronics for communicating with the server.<br>
The gun's infrared emitter encodes the identity into a PWM signal.
The vest has infrared detectors that decode the pulses and send it to the server.<br>
Player scores are updated by periodic routines.
<br>
<br>

---

## Status

I have decided to terminate this project as on September 9, 2017, due to the enormous infrastructure and diverse knowledge needed to make this happen.<br>
This project requires a lot of back-end server management, and even if there is a kind soul ready to help me out with that, we'll still be limited by the hardware this project demands.<br>
Moreover, playing this game makes sense only at night. Because Infrared.<br>

Progress till date can be viewed [here](https://www.github.com/akhilrb/rfps).