---
layout: post
title: URL (Ultimate Room Lights)
category: techblog
date: 2018-03-23
---

<br>
## Motivation

I read about [The Paradox of Choice](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Paradox_of_Choice) recently, which boils down to the assertion that *more is less*.<br>
Indirectly quoting Barry Schwartz here, The Paradox of Choice claims that a large amount of choice is commonly associated with welfare and freedom but too much choice causes the feeling of less happiness and less satisfaction.<br>
Personally, I don't believe this is true. Although I accept that a plethora of choices can paralyze the brain for some time, I argue that the pressure of making a decision is bound to settle all thoughts to a final choice.<br>
The internet is filled with debates speaking equally, for and against, The Paradox of Choice.<br>
<br>

---

## So What Is URL?

To test this for myself, I thought of the idea of Ultimate Room Lights.<br>
These are basically lights that add ambience in exactly the way the user wants.<br>
To make it ridiculously easy and instant, there's also a smartphone app for editing any kind of parameters of the lighting.
Want the lights to pulse at a specific colour? Open your app, choose any colour, set the pulse time, done.<br>
Want the lights to work as automatic night lights? One tap on the app, done.<br>
And guess what, individual settings for RGB channels can be customised! For example, set the pulse time for Green to 2.718 seconds and Red to 3.141 seconds.<br>
Let's get dirty now. <br>
Want to pulsate a colour which also works as night lights?<br>
Don't want a specific colour (RGB ratio) to ever light up?<br>
Want to route a specific colour to the individual frequency bands of ambient sound?<br>
Want to route a specific colour to the individual frequency bands of ambient sound along with any of pulsating/flashing effects all the time avoiding a specific colour?<br>

You get what I want to convey.<br>
Ideally, the finished project would suit any kind of workspace according to any kind of personal taste due to the diverse tweaking options.<br>

As much as I am a lover of comfort zones in work environments, I plan on finding out whether I keep tweaking the options endlessly, or actually feel a productivity boost owing to the desired ambience.<br>
<br>

---

## Status

All project files can be found [here](https://github.com/akhilrb/url)